Well hi everyone and thanks for joining me on this webinar. I'm going to do kind
of a quick overview of some of the new stuff in Dplyr 0.7. We'll start with
kind of a bunch of smaller stuff, none of it's kind of particularly exciting by
itself, but in aggregate it adds up to just relieving a whole bunch of small
pain points in Dplyr. Then I'll talk a little bit about databases and then
finish off by talking about TidyEval, which is a new system for programming
in Dplyr. So there should be plenty of time for questions. I'll stop after each
section and take any that look particularly interesting to the whole
crowd. Okay, so the first thing I wanted to mention, if you don't already know
about it, Dplyr has a website now, dplyr.tidyverse.org. That's a great
way if you want to see the examples and the code, see the vignettes, and
generally get an overview of the package. So that's a great place to start if
there's anything you want to know more about Dplyr after this webinar. I also
wanted to mention briefly the Tidyverse package. I'm just going to use, if you
haven't heard of the Tidyverse, the Tidyverse package just basically makes
it easy to get a bunch of packages that work well together. So when you install
it, it installs all of the packages in the Tidyverse, and then when you load it,
it loads the most important packages. So here I'm showing you the development
version, which in conjunction with the development version of RStudio gives you
this pretty colorful display telling you which packages are loaded. So you can see
here I'm using the development version of Purr. It gives you a little bit of
information, a little bit of session info, so you can, if you're having problems, you
can, you know, if your code works on your computer and not someone else's, you can
often track down the difference to one of these issues, and then finally tells
you what are the functions that the Tidyverse is masking from base R or other
packages. So with that, let's dive into some of the new stuff in Dplyr. The first
one is that there's two new datasets that, if you're teaching Dplyr, might be
handy, and we'll be using these more and more in the examples to illustrate more
sophisticated features of Dplyr. So the first one is the Star Wars dataset, which
contains a bunch of information about the characters from Star Wars, which come
from the SWAPI, the Star Wars API site, and one of the things that's different
about this dataset compared to other datasets and other packages is this
contains a few simple list columns. So for example, you can look at this films
column, and that tells you it's a list column because each person may have
appeared in more than one, or I think they've all appeared in more than one,
but some of these other Star Wars vehicles are similar, because someone might
have not traveled in any vehicle, or they might have traveled in more than one
vehicle, hopefully. So Star Wars, some fun data about the characters in the Star
Wars universe, and contains some list columns to practice your list column
skills on. The other new dataset is this dataset about storms in the
Atlantic. This contains a whole bunch of data from the, I've forgotten where it's from,
hopefully the documentation will tell me, from the NOAA Atlantic hurricane
database. So there are 198 storms in here, going from 1975 to today. We can do
a quick plot, and you can see approximately where they start out,
and where they end. So this dataset has a rich grouping data, rich grouping data
structure, rich grouping structure, because you're probably going to want to
group each storm, and then do compute various summary statistics on. So great, a
dataset for practicing your group bias skills. So two new datasets, there's a
handful of other datasets that you can read about in the release notes, or the
blog posts, that are just really simple datasets, if you want to teach people
basic join functions, or practice them yourself. There's one new important verb
in dplyr called pull. Pull gives you a single column. So this has been a
long-time source of frustration for many dplyr users. If you use select, and give
it a single variable name, it's still going to give you a tibble back. It's
going to give you a tibble that just has a single column. If you use pull, it is
going to give you that single vector. This is basically equivalent to this
code you could do already, using the dollar sign, but it works on database
backends, and the other thing that's sometimes handy, is you can use it to
select columns by their position. The default, you can also, so you can select
from the front, from the left-hand side, if you give it a positive number, or you
can select from the right-hand side, if you give a negative number, and indeed if
you don't give pull anything, that is the default. It's going to take the right
most column by default, kind of under the assumption that, if you've just created
something, and you probably want to take a look at it. So that's pull. The new
data sets, those are kind of the biggest of the small new things. There's a bunch
of, we put a bunch of work into improving the error messages, so
hopefully if you do something by accident, that you didn't mean to, you
should now get a better error message from dplyr, that tells you both where the
problem is, i.e. the column, what it was expecting, and what you gave it, which
would hopefully make any problems easy to diagnose in dplyr. We also put a bunch
of time into encoding support in dplyr. Probably the most, the case that
affected the most number of people, was if you use CJK, Chinese, Japanese, or
Korean languages, or data sets containing those languages on Windows,
you basically could not use dplyr without a huge amount of pain. So that
should now all be resolved, and if you discover any differently, please let us
know so we can fix that. We also made some changes to make joins and similar
functions behave better when the columns you're joining have different
encodings. I just wanted to still illustrate one little example of this,
which, just to illustrate how painful encodings in R can be, because
here I've just created a string, dates the word I live, which if I remember my high school
French correctly, means student, and when you print these two strings out, they
look identical, and indeed if you ask identical, are they the same, it says yes,
well I guess they are the same, but if you go and say, well tell me the binary
representation of the string using char to raw, we can see that they're actually
different strings, and that's because they have a different encoding. So you
can see X is encoded as UTF-8, and Y is encoded as Latin 1. So now dplyr
should just kind of handle this problem for you automatically. If
you're using Redar and other packages in the tinyverse, you should always get
UTF data as your input, generally that's easier to work with, just stick with
UTF-8 rather than messing around with different encodings. So whatever
your encoding is on disk, load that up, convert it to UTF-8, and use that in dplyr.
So again, by and large, this problem should just go away behind
the scenes without you having to do anything. One other tiny little
feature that's quite nice is now that case when function works inside
mutate. Maybe you have not seen case when before, but it's a really useful
alternative to a whole bunch of nested if-elses. So I'll show you a quick little
demo of using case when, just a simple case, and then show what that looks like
now that it works inside mutate. So here I'm going to use case when to implement
the sort of infamous fizzbuzz programming challenge. And basically in
the fizzbuzz programming challenge, what you have to do is print out a vector of
50 or 100 numbers, but when that number is divisible by 5, you need to print fizz.
When it's divisible by 7, you need to print buzz. And when it's divisible by
5 and 7, you need to print fizzbuzz. In case when allows you to express this
very succinctly, it says basically we use the formula, the tilde is
basically kind of an if-then. So if it's divisible by 35, then return fizzbuzz.
If it's divisible by 5, then return fizz. If it's divisible by 7, then return
buzz. Otherwise, for everything else, true is always going to be true,
convert it to a character. So case when operates sequentially, so as soon as the
first thing is true, it's going to ignore the rest. So when we run this on my
vector 1 to 5, we solve this fizzbuzz programming challenge. 1, 2, 3, 4, fizz, 6,
fuzz, 8, 9, fizz, and so on. A more realistic use is to use it in the
context of a data frame. It's really useful when you need to recode variables.
So here I've just kind of made a very somewhat silly example using the Star
Wars data set where I want to categorize the different characters based
on a combination of their height and their mass and their species. So I'm
saying if the height is greater than 200 centimeters or their mass is greater
than 200 kilograms, I'm going to say that they're a large type. If they are a
droid, I'm going to say they're a robot type. If they're a human, I'm going to say
they're a human type. Otherwise, so true means otherwise, I'll just mark them as
other. So when I run this, I get a new column called type which succinctly
expresses exactly how I want to do that transformation. And this is much easier
than doing the kind of equivalent set of if-else statements which would look
like 200 mass greater than 200 in large. Otherwise, I need to do another if-else
with species. Species equals droid. And if you've ever written any of these kind of
nested if-else statements yourself, you know this gets painful really, really
quickly. There's a whole bunch of other bug fixes, mostly just little stuff. But
you know, whenever you hit a bug, no matter how small it is, it's always
frustrating to deal with. So that's kind of a summary of the few of my
most favorite small features in DeepLear. I'll take a quick look at the
questions just to see if anything has come up. I see someone has asked about if
a data set does not fit a memory, which we're going to talk about next. And if
you haven't seen this operator before, percent percent, this is not a
DeepLear thing. This is a base R thing. This is the modulo operator. So this
expression basically means if it's divisible by 35 with remainder zero. And
yes, case when works with all of the Dply verbs, summarize, mutate, and so on.
If you're going to use case, although if you're going to use case when with
summarize, I guess case when works with summarize for some definition of work.
It's basically a vectorized function, which means it gives you the same
number of outputs as the same number of inputs as the number of inputs, which
means it's most fitting to work with mutate. With a summary function,
you generally want a function that takes multiple values and returns a single value.
So case when you could probably make it work with summarize, but typically
you'd need to use some kind of summary function from
around the outside. That doesn't make any sense in this case, but maybe you
can say paste. And when you supply the collapse argument to paste, that becomes
a summary function because it's going to take in strings and return a single
string. Okay, so next I wanted to talk about the new database support in Dply
or the improved database support in Dply. Again, if you want to learn more
about this, the best place is the website dbplyr. So dbplyr is the package
that now provides all the database related functionality in Dplyr. By and
large, you will not need to know about this package. You will generally not need
to attach this package, but so dplyr will load that for you. You'll need to
install it and you'll need to know that this is where that code is if you need
to get help. So the biggest change in this version of dbplyr is that this
version of dplyr and the matching version of dbplyr is that there's much
much better integration with the DBI package now. So the DBI package is a
uniform interface to many, many, many different databases. So to use the DBI
package, you always pair it with a database specific R package. So for
example, I am going to create a connection to a database. So to create a
connection to a database, you use the dbconnect function from the DBI package.
And the first argument to that function is the database driver or the R
package that provides the database connection. So here I'm going to connect
to a SQLite database, which is provided by the SQLite package. If you haven't
heard of SQLite before, this is a great, this is a fantastic place to start with
databases because the database is actually included in the SQLite, in the
SQLite package. So most database systems, you've got like a database server, which
can be a paint to set up and get running. With SQLite, that database is
actually bundled in the package for you. So it's really, really easy to get up and
going. And I'm going to cheat even further, I'm going to make this even easier to get
up and going with, and I'm going to use a temporary in-memory database. So I have a
connection to this database, and you can use DBI to connect to all sorts of
packages, SQLite, MySQL, Postgres. And then I'll talk a little bit, a little bit
later about some of the new enterprise databases that we're working to build
support for at RStudio as well. So I've got a connection to that database, and now I am
going to use one of the DBI functions, DBI write table, to copy a data frame to
that database. And so what's new in this version is basically the seamless
interaction between DBI, which is a very low level function that allows you to
execute SQL queries directly, if you know SQL, and DBI, and Dply, which is a much
higher level interface, which will write those SQL queries for you. So now I can
say, create a new table from this connection. I'm going to call this, the
database table is called MT cars, and I'm going to call this our object MT cars
too, just because, just to avoid confusion with the other, the previous MT
cars data frame. So I print this out, you'll see that this is now a remote
table. It's a table in a database, and in fact in that database is a SQLite database.
And the neat thing about using Dply with a database is that Dply will
generate the SQL for you. And there's been a bunch of improvements to the
SQL generation in this version. One of the really nice improvements is this
optimizer that was contributed by H. Hifflin, which reduces a lot of the sub
queries that Dply added previously. So let's take it a little example. I'm going
to take this MT cars 2 data set, I'm going to filter it, I'm going to select
some variables, and then I'm only going to look at the top 10. And if I was going to
run, if I just run this code, what Dply does behind the scenes is
generate the SQL query, sends that to the database, the database does all the
work, and then returns the results. If you want to see the query that Dply is
generating, you can use the show query function, and you can see here this
query is probably pretty similar to what you'd write by hand. We're going to
select these variables from this data, from this table, where this condition is
true, and I'm going to limit the results to at most two. Now in the previous
version of Dply, this would have generated at least, you know, three sub
queries, which in some databases can degrade performance, and definitely makes
it harder to understand what Dply is doing when it generates the
SQL for you. We've also added more support for type coercion, so if you need
to change the type of a variable in the database to a character, or a vector, or
an integer, you can use the R functions you're familiar with, and those
will automatically be converted behind the scenes to the appropriate SQL. So
here you can see I'm using transmute. If you haven't heard of transmute before,
it's a variant of mutate that just only keeps the variables you specify, it
doesn't keep all the other variables. So you can see what this generates.
Oops, forgot the byte. You can see what this generates. This isn't quite as
optimal SQL, but you can see that it's generating this cast, which is how
you change the type of a variable in SQL. And again, and here I used pull as
well, just to pull down that variable from that query out of the database.
Another thing that's changed in the latest version of Dply is that
there's an annoying bug whenever you're using in. Now this always generates
the correct SQL. Previously we'd forget to put the parentheses in there, which is
valid R code, but not valid SQL code. So baked in to Dbply, there's
translation support for the major open source databases, SQLite, MySQL, and
PostgreSQL. We are working to add more support for commercial databases. So
this version also includes translation support for MS, Microsoft SQL Server,
Apache Impala and Apache Hive when you use them through the ODBC package. The
ODBC package is another package we've been working on recently. It is a DBI
compliant back end for ODBC databases. So this makes, ODBC is a very popular
standard for connecting to databases. This makes it very, very easy to
connect to a whole bunch of commercial databases that are not, that do not
have the best support in R right now. So this is something we're working on
hard at RStudio at the moment. You'll hear more from us in the near future,
but we want connecting to any database. We want to make it as easy as possible
to get your data from wherever it is, whether it's SQL Server, whether it's
Oracle, whether it's Postgres, whether it's Redshift, to get that data from
wherever it lives inside your organization and into R. And we've been
working on a whole set of whole, there's like 10 packages involved in various
ways at the moment. We'll be displaying, we'll be sharing that vision with you
in the very near future. There's a whole bunch of other small improvements to
SQL translation. Again, just little things. If they affected you before,
there'll be much less pain now than there was previously. But the other big
thing that a lot of people have been clamoring for is support for schemas. So
I'm just going to do a little demonstration of that. I'm going to
create another database, another SQLite database, and I'm going to attach it.
This is the way that SQLite allows you to work with multiple schemas. SQLite
is kind of a very small database. It doesn't have like amazing schema support,
but at least allows you to demonstrate the feature. I'm going to create two
tables, both called df. One is going to be the iris data frame, and one
is going to be the empty cars data frame. And I'm going to put these in different
schemes. So now dbplyr has this new function called in schema, which allows
you to be specific about what schema you want to look for the table in. So here
this is saying, look in the auxiliary schema for a table named df. And when we
do that, what you can see here basically is that when we refer to this, we can now
be explicit about what schema we want to get our table from. So if you don't use
schemas, this does not affect you at all, but many big
corporate databases use schemas extensively, and this should make your
life much, much easier. So that was a quick overview of the new database
features in dplyr. Let's look for a few questions. So one question is if there's
plans to use the bit64 package to support 64-bit integers. That's not
going to happen at the dbplyr level, but that's work that's in
progress on the dbi package, and unfortunately it needs work on all of
the individual database backends. That's something that I think we've
added or in the process of adding to the dbi specification, and that
will kind of slowly roll out to the various database backends over the
next 12 months. And I'm pretty sure we've added that support into the odbc
package. A few other questions about specific databases. Yes, we're going to
add support for oracle. Yes, we will add specific redshift support. The
translation in general is, it's obvious you've documented more on the dbplyr
website. It works best for the types of simple expressions that you do when you
are typically filtering and summarizing and mutating your data. This is not a
trend. You can't just run any arbitrary R code on the database. Obviously there's
no way to run like a linear model on the database or a generalized additive model
on the database. Databases just don't have support for that. So the goal with the SQL
translation in dplyr, dbplyr, is to allow you to kind of iterate quickly. Typically
there are a very large number of big data problems, where the key
problem is just getting the right small data. And you need to be able to iterate
quickly between the day, getting the right data into R. And rather than
having to constantly context switch between dplyr and R code and
SQL code, you can focus on just writing R code and dplyr will take care of
writing the SQL for you. So this is, in practice, most of the people I've talked to, the translation
just works. If it doesn't work, you can always write the SQL code yourself. But for the type
of simple stuff that you're typically doing when like summarizing or subset, the translation
is really, really good. Okay, so let's finish off by talking about tidy eval, which is kind
of the biggest and most complicated new feature in dplyr. And before I sort of talk about
exactly what this is, I want to like illustrate the problem that we're trying to solve. And
so here I've got a little table and I'm doing some data analysis with it. And I'm basically
each of these three clumps of code, I am doing the same summary, but with a different
group. And so to do this with dplyr, you might be copying and pasting your code. And that's
great. I think a rule of thumb is it's fine to kind of copy and paste up to like three
times. But as soon as you go beyond that, it's worth the investment to write a function.
And that's because often, you know, the thing that you're doing is changes, or you discover
a bug. And if you've copied and pasted that code everywhere, tracking down every single
instance of that bug can be really painful. So it's a really good idea to turn repeated
code that you've created by copying and pasting into a function. But this is hard because
dplyr lacks a property called referential transparency. So let me try and just describe
this quickly. So basically, and I've created two simple functions, one that just multiplies
its input by 10, and one that adds 10. And normally, when you're writing functions in
R, you can extract out kind of a subextract expression or part of that function called
and assign it to a variable. And that doesn't matter. You can do that as much as you like,
and you always get the same result. That's what's called referential transparency. You
can create new variables, and it doesn't change how the expression is computed. But
this doesn't work with dplyr because you can't pull out that expression. You can't pull out
this repeated code, this G1, this G2, and just G3. You can't assign that to a variable
because there is no objects called that. Because inside the dplyr expressions, to make your
data analysis, your data manipulation as fast and fluid as possible. And here, this
variable refers to a variable inside the data. So this is one of the features of R called
the sometimes called nonstandard evaluation, where we're taking this expression and we're
evaluating it in a special way. And this is really great because it allows you to save
so much typing. You're not constantly having to type the name of the data frame again and
again and again in your expressions. But the downside of this implicitness is that
it's hard to program. And so in this version of dplyr, we have a new system called tidy
eval, which is basically a new framework for programming with dplyr, dealing with this
type of problem in general. And so if you encounter this problem, you might say, well,
I can't assign it to, I can't assign the bear variable name. Maybe I could try putting
that inside a string. And that still doesn't work because it's looking for a column called
group var. It's not looking inside that variable to find the G2. So to solve this problem,
we have a new data structure called a quosure, which you can create with the quo function.
So this basically kind of captures the expression. So this is what dplyr is all about. It's
about capturing what you want and evaluating it at a different time. So when you do this
in dplyr, it's about capturing this expression and evaluating in a different context, in
a context where you don't have to say which data frame every variable comes with. Or in
the case of when you're talking to a database, the expression actually doesn't even get evaluated
by R. It gets evaluated by the database much, much later on. So now we can use this quo
function to kind of capture this variable. So we're saying we don't want, we want to
use this variable G1 later on. Now, unfortunately, that still doesn't work with group var. And
what we need is some way to kind of unquote this variable. We just say, don't take this
valuable, don't take this input literally, look inside this variable and see what it
looks like. And so we now have this unquoting tool, bang, bang. And so what this tells dplyr
to do is don't just say, don't look at group var literally, look at what's inside a group
var and evaluate that. And so this gives us the ability to program with dplyr. We can
now create functions where you can write functions that work like dplyr does. We can
even take this further. You can not only do the grouping variables, but you can use this
in every single function in dplyr, whether it's summarize or mutate or mean or whatever.
So this, I am like a hundred percent confident that the theory behind this is, is correct
and robust and works like a hundred percent of the time, not just 95% of the time. We
are still working to like try and explain it in a way that, that you can understand.
This is basically, it's sort of a similar level of complexity to learning how to write
functions. So if my explanation right now just left you reeling and confused, do not
blame yourself. That is my fault that I do not know a good way of explaining that yet,
that yet, but we are working on that. You can always see kind of our latest efforts
on the dplyr website. There was an article about programming with dplyr that explains
the problem in much more depth. And we will keep rewriting that until we are confident
that we have figured out a good way to explain what's going on here in a way that you can
understand and then deploy in your own code. So that's all I had to talk about. Let's take
a look at a few, a few questions. Again, I'm just going to kind of skim through and if
anyone else from studio wants to like raise any questions to me, please do so. But I'll
just take a quick look at these questions and see what, what might be of interest broadly.
So one question is, what's the difference between this new system and the previous system
which used underscores after function names? It looked more like this. It used functions
and it used formulas. And basically the problem with the old system is that there was no easy
way to write code like this. You'd have to do something. And I honestly, I don't even,
I think you have to write like interp and then you have to do something like this, I think.
And you'd like to say summary var equals. So basically the previous system of non-standard
evaluation was extremely constrained and it didn't actually help you solve the problems
that you, that you really needed to solve. So again, this new systems,
it's a little bit more complicated. It's going to take a little bit more work to,
to understand what's going on. But I think that investing the time in that is really going to
pay off because it allows you to do more things in dplyr and we're going to be rolling out the
system everywhere in the tidyverse. So hopefully in the next month or so, you'll be able to use
the same system in tidyr. And by the end of the year, you'll be able to use the same system in
ggplot2. So again, it's an investment. It's going to take a little bit of time to get your head
around it. But once you do, you're going to be using it in many, many, many places. It's going
to make programming with all of these kind of slightly magical functions designed for data
analysis much, much easier. Yeah. So someone pointed out that quo and bang bang are kind of
somewhat equivalent to B quote and eval. Yes, that is absolutely correct. Although B quote only
handles the expression, not the associated environment, which leads to subtle bugs that
again, sort of B quote kind of works like, you know, 95% of the time, which makes the 5% of the
time it doesn't work. Really, really frustrating to debug. We've tried to move that pain kind of
upfront with tidy eval. It's going to be a little bit more painful to learn it, but once you've
learned it, there should be far fewer unpleasant surprises down the end. Bunch of questions are
about quo and in quo. Yes. So a lot of you spotted that I used quo in my example up here, but then I
used in quo inside the function. The difference here is a little bit subtle, but quo basically
always gives you its input back. So if I used quo inside this function, it's always going to use,
it's always going to put group var, but here I don't actually want group var. I want the value
in the group var variable. I want to kind of go one level up to see what's inside that expression.
And that's what in quo does rather than quo. So in quo captures exactly what's inside the
parentheses. In quo you use inside a function that looks at that argument and see what expression
was associated with that expression. A couple of people asked about whether case when translates
to SQL queries. That is a very good question that I will have to look at the source code to answer.
It was definitely inspired by it. So it looks like we do not currently have a
translation for it, but case when was inspired by the case when function in SQL. So I'm just going
to quickly file an issue so I don't forget to add a SQL translation for case when.
Translation for case when. So we'll make sure that happens in the next version.
So we had lots of questions about unquoting. Basically, there are, I kind of don't want to
answer all of them here because they're fairly specific. But if you have any questions,
do please read this programming article, which should hopefully answer your questions.
If it does not, please let me know. You can shoot me an email or send an email to the manipulator
programming list and we'll work. But basically, looking through the questions, if you did ask
a question about this, the answer is yes, it is possible. It is similar to, it's kind of like
macro variables in SAS, although it's, those are just kind of work on the basis of text substitution.
This is much, this is much more robust and works in a, in a much wider range of situations.